V-Server Setup (#1)
reiloe/v-server-setup: README.md

# Project V-Server Setup

## Goal

The goal of this project is to set up a V-Server. This includes passwordless SSH login, installation of NGINX including a custom index page, and a preconfigured Git.

## Table of content

1. [SSH](#SSH)
2. [NGINX](#NGINX)
3. [Git](#Git)
3. [Automation](#Automation)
4. [Tips](#Tips)

## SSH

### Create SSH key pair

To create a SSH Key pair use the following command:

```bash
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -N "" -f <path/to/private-key/private-key-name>
```

> [!NOTE]
> Parameter -N "" is used for preventing a passphrase prompt.

### Upload SSH public key to V-Server

To upload the generated public key:

```bash
ssh-copy-id -i  ~/.ssh/da_vserver/da_vserver.pub <username>@<vserver-ip>
```

### Testing SSH connection

To test V-Server login via SSH key pair:

```bash
ssh -o "IdentitiesOnly=yes" -i  ~/.ssh/da_vserver/da_vserver <vserver-ip>
```

### Disable USERNAME/PASSWORD login

> If the setup of SSH key pair, including login check, was successfuly disable USERNAME/PASSWORD login. For that adapt the config file of the SSH server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the setup of SSH key pair, including login check was successful, disable USERNAME/PASSWORD login. For that adapt the config file of the SSH server.
```

> [!CAUTION]
> The config file is named sshd_config and can be found at /etc/ssh

Open the sshd_config file, search for:

```text
#PasswordAuthentication yes
```

uncomment this line and change yes to no.

```text
PasswordAuthentication no
```

> [!Tip]
> To check that login with username/password is not longer possible logout from V-Server and run following code

> 

Reviewer: This section is missing a restart of the ssh-service on the ubuntu machine. Your current setup won't respect the change to the config if the config is not reloaded by `ssh`.

Author: done

```bash
git --version
```

If git is installed the output of the command should look like this:

![Git version output](img/git-version.png)

If git is not installed install git:

```bash
sudo apt install git -y
```

At least configure git to use your name and email

```bash
git config --global user.name "<username>"
git config --global user.email <my@email.address>
```

> [!CAUTION]
> The username has to be in quotation marks if the name contains spaces.

Check the config settings used by git

```bash
git config -l
```

The output should be like this:

![Git config output](img/git-config.png)

## Automation

If you want to automate the setup (e.g., because you often want to set up servers with this configuration), automating the entire process is a good idea.

> [!CAUTION]
> The following process is primarily intended for experienced users. It is best to test the code locally on a VM beforehand to find any errors or even lock yourself out of the server.

> [!Note]
> The code in the scripts was tested on a Mac. The VM for testing was a Ubuntu Server 24.04.3 LTS on Parallels Desktop.
> Because of Mac some Shell commands are differend (syntax and formatting)

> To autmate the process I have created a shell script named setup_prerequisites.sh which do the following:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To automate the process I have created a shell script named `setup_prerequisites.sh` which does the following:  
```

- Input check (You have to input the username and ip for the V-Server as argument)
- Creation of SSH key pair
- Upload public key to V-Server
- Adaption of the inventory file (replace placeholder for name and ip)
- Adaption of a config file (ssh_configuration) for local SSH server (is being imported in ~/.ssh/config)
- Adaption of a shell script file (for later usage) to config git on V-Server
- Executing the Ansible Playbook

The Ansible Playbook is very basic with following tasks:

- Deactivating username/password login
- Update/upgrade package list and packages
- Installation of NGINX
- Upload the alternative index page
- Configuration of NGINX to use the new index page
- Execution of the git_config script to configure git

## Tips

> Create an alias for the SSH connection so you dont need typing the whole command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an alias for the SSH connection so you don't need typing the whole command.
```

# Project V-Server Setup

## Goal

The goal of this project is to set up a V-Server. This includes passwordless SSH login, installation of NGINX including a custom index page, and a preconfigured Git.

## Table of content

1. [SSH](#SSH)
2. [NGINX](#NGINX)
3. [Git](#Git)
3. [Automation](#Automation)
4. [Tips](#Tips)

## SSH

### Create SSH key pair

To create a SSH Key pair use the following command:

```bash
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -N "" -f <path/to/private-key/private-key-name>
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Parameter -N "" is used for preventing a password prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Parameter -N "" is used for preventing a passphrase prompt.
```

Author: done

### Upload SSH public key to V-Server

To upload the generated public key:

```bash
ssh-copy-id -i  ~/.ssh/da_vserver/da_vserver.pub <username>@<vserver-ip>
```

### Testing SSH connection

To test V-Server login via SSH key pair:

```bash
ssh -o "IdentitiesOnly=yes" -i  ~/.ssh/da_vserver/da_vserver <vserver-ip>
```

### Disable USERNAME/PASSWORD login

If the setup of SSH key pair, including login check, was successfuly disable USERNAME/PASSWORD login. For that adapt the config file of the SSH server.

> [!CAUTION]
> The config file is named sshd_config and can be found at /etc/ssh

#### Method 1

Open the sshd_config file, search for:

```text
#PasswordAuthentication yes
```

uncomment this line and change yes to no.

```text
PasswordAuthentication no
```

#### Method 2

By using the following command:

```bash
sed -i'.bak' 's/#PasswordAuthentication yes/PasswordAuthentication no/g' /etc/ssh/sshd_config

> ```

Reviewer 2: Both methods basically do the same thing, I'd remove Method 2 for better a reading flow :)

Author: done

> [!Tip]
> To check that login with username/password is not longer possible logout from V-Server and run following code

```bash
ssh -o PubkeyAuthentication=no '<username>@<v-server-ip>'
```

The message “Permission denied (publickey)” should be displayed.

***
> [!Tip]
> On the Host Machine:
> If you want add the following lines to the config file of the SSH client.[^1]
> The config file is named config and can be found at ~/.ssh

```text
Host <VServer-IP>
  User <SSH username>
  HostName <VServer-IP>
  IdentityFile <path/to/private-key/private-key-name>

>   ```

Reviewer 2: Good job :) Indeed pay attention to the indentation, but also for the triple backticks ```

Author: done

***

## NGINX

> [!Note]
> All subsequent commands are executed on the V-Server.
> To do this, open a terminal and log in to the V-Server via SSH.

### Udate/Upgrade VServer Packages

```bash
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
```

### Install NGINX

```bash
sudo apt install nginx -y
```

### Create alternate index.htnl

To create an alternative index.html create a folder named alternatives in /var/www/

```bash
sudo mkdir /var/www/alternatives
```

Then create a file named alternate-index.html in thid folder and open it with an editor[^2] of choice

[^2]: I use nano. If nano not is installed, install nano with: sudo apt install nano -y

> [!Note]
> You can create and open the file in one command

```bash
sudo nano /var/www/alternatives/alternate-index.html
```

Fill in some html code

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="ie=edge">
    <title>Alternative Index</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <main>
        <h1>Welcome on alternative index site</h1>  
    </main>
  </body>
</html>

> ```

Reviewer 2: Since you already have a .html file like this present in this repository, just mention and link it in the readme instead of pasting the code-content into the readme. This way you'd only have to adjust the file itself when changes occure.

Author: done

Save and exit the editor by pressing STRG-O followed by pressing STRG-X

To tell NGINX to use this alternative index page, create a file named alternate in the /etc/nginx/sites-enabled directory.
To do this, you can also open the editor directly by specifying a file name. The editor will create the new file if it does not already exist.

```bash
sudo nano /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/alternate
```

Paste in the following content:

```text
server {
    listen 8081;
    listen [::]:8081;

    root /var/www/alternatives;
    index alternate-index.html;

    location / {
        try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Same as above

Author: done
